README.md, before:

# Analysis of environmental diversity using amplicon sequencing

This pipeline system uses [Snakemake](https://snakemake.github.io/) to create and integrate different amplicon pipelines. Their results can be easily compared due to a common file structure of the output directories, which may serve as input e.g. for R-based analyses.

*Note:* The repository was created to fit the needs of the author and is tailored for the analysis of paired-end Illumina data from fungi or arthropods, but it may be extended further (see [below](#still-not-finished)).

*Pipelines*

- [USEARCH](https://www.drive5.com/usearch/manual)/[VSEARCH](https://github.com/torognes/vsearch)-based amplicon pipeline using UNOISE3 for obtaining ASVs (implemented here from scratch with Snakemake)
- [QIIME2](https://qiime2.org) (DADA2 denoising)
- [Amptk](https://github.com/nextgenusfs/amptk) (UNOISE3 and DADA2)
- (more may follow)

*Features*

- Running different pipelines or variations of the same pipeline using different sets of parameters, which are defined in a [`configuration file`](config/config.yaml).
- Simultaneous processing of amplicons generated using different primer sets
- Multiple taxonomic assignment methods can be applied to the denoised dataset using marker-specific reference databases; currently implemented: [UNITE](https://unite.ut.ee) for Eukaryote ITS and [Midori](http://www.reference-midori.info) for mitochondrial markers (more may follow)

The pipeline is tested using amplicon data from a fungal mock community ([`test` directory](test/)) and the results of the different pipelines can be compared [using a script](#comparison-of-denoisingclustering-pipelines).

The current rule graph (see also [description of target rules](Commands.md)):

![rule graph](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/markschl/env-diversity/main/rulegraph.png)


## Installing

The pipeline makes use of the [Conda package manager](https://conda.io), the installation is thus pretty straightforward ([see instructions here](INSTALL.md)).

## Configuring

The easiest is to copy the contents of the [config](config/) directory into the future analysis directory and then modify the files according to your needs. [`config.yaml`](config/config.yaml) contains all settings, while the taxonomic databases can be configured in [`taxonomy.yaml`](config/taxonomy.yaml). Please refer to the comments in these config files.

## Running

As visible in the rulegraph above, there are a few Snakemake target rules, which can be run independently (even though they also partly depend on each other). A complete list of commands is [found here](Commands.md).

### On a local computer

The following command runs the test pipeline (FASTQ files from sequencing fungal mock comunities in the [`test` directory](test/)) on a local computer.

```sh
conda activate snakemake
snakemake -c6 --use-conda --conda-prefix ~/conda -d test denoise cmp taxonomy ITS
```

Note that the `~/conda` directory is used for the installation of all additional necessary software. This allows reusing the installed software across analyzes of different datasets.

### On a computer cluster

A complete denoising run of a dataset on a HPCC with the SLURM job scheduler may look like this:

```sh
outdir=~/path/to/analysis  # must contain a config directory
conda activate snakemake
snakemake -j10 -c20 \
    --use-conda --conda-prefix ~/conda \
    --slurm \
    -d $outdir \
    --rerun-incomplete \
    denoise cmp taxonomy ITS \
    --default-resources runtime=180
```


## Analyzing in R

The R source file [`R/read_amplicon.R`](R/read_amplicon.R) provides code for reading all data from a results directory. See also the small [example analysis](test/R_example/example.md).


## Comparison of denoising/clustering pipelines

There is a separate bash script `scripts/compare_results.sh`, which creates an Excel file comparing the number of reads assigned to each 98% cluster by each pipeline. A separate workbook is created for each sample. The script requires VSEARCH, as well as R with the following packages: `ggplot2`, `tidyverse`, `data.table` and `openxlsx`.


## Still not finished...

A list of possible next steps includes:

- Enable single-end analyses and other platforms than Illumina
- Integrate more pipelines / clustering methods
- Integrate more taxonomy databases
- Testing deployment on different systems
- Improve configuration of job resources (memory, CPUs)
- The USEARCH pipeline may be moved into an extra repository to be used independently. This repo has a strong focus on the comparison of a variety of different pipelines as well as handling complex cases (e.g. several primer combinations).
- ...

Commit message:

Better rule grouping and localrule settings

README.md, after:

# Analysis of environmental diversity using amplicon sequencing

This pipeline system uses [Snakemake](https://snakemake.github.io/) to create and integrate different amplicon pipelines. Their results can be easily compared due to a common file structure of the output directories, which may serve as input e.g. for R-based analyses.

*Note:* The repository was created to fit the needs of the author and is tailored for the analysis of paired-end Illumina data from fungi or arthropods, but it may be extended further (see [below](#still-not-finished)).

*Pipelines*

- [USEARCH](https://www.drive5.com/usearch/manual)/[VSEARCH](https://github.com/torognes/vsearch)-based amplicon pipeline using UNOISE3 for obtaining ASVs (implemented here from scratch with Snakemake)
- [QIIME2](https://qiime2.org) (DADA2 denoising)
- [Amptk](https://github.com/nextgenusfs/amptk) (UNOISE3 and DADA2)
- (more may follow)

*Features*

- Running different pipelines or variations of the same pipeline using different sets of parameters, which are defined in a [`configuration file`](config/config.yaml).
- Simultaneous processing of amplicons generated using different primer sets
- Multiple taxonomic assignment methods can be applied to the denoised dataset using marker-specific reference databases; currently implemented: [UNITE](https://unite.ut.ee) for Eukaryote ITS and [Midori](http://www.reference-midori.info) for mitochondrial markers (more may follow)

The pipeline is tested using amplicon data from a fungal mock community ([`test` directory](test/)) and the results of the different pipelines can be compared [using a script](#comparison-of-denoisingclustering-pipelines).

The current rule graph (see also [description of target rules](Commands.md)):

![rule graph](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/markschl/env-diversity/main/rulegraph.png)


## Installing

The pipeline makes use of the [Conda package manager](https://conda.io), the installation is thus pretty straightforward ([see instructions here](INSTALL.md)).

## Configuring

The easiest is to copy the contents of the [config](config/) directory into the future analysis directory and then modify the files according to your needs. [`config.yaml`](config/config.yaml) contains all settings, while the taxonomic databases can be configured in [`taxonomy.yaml`](config/taxonomy.yaml). Please refer to the comments in these config files.

## Running

As visible in the rulegraph above, there are a few Snakemake target rules, which can be run independently (even though they also partly depend on each other). A complete list of commands is [found here](Commands.md).

### On a local computer

The following command runs the test pipeline (FASTQ files from sequencing fungal mock comunities in the [`test` directory](test/), specified with `-d test`) using 6 cores on a local computer. The  [target rules](Commands.md) to be run are `denoise`, `cmp`, `taxonomy` and `ITS`.

```sh
conda activate snakemake
snakemake -c6 --use-conda --conda-prefix ~/conda -d test denoise cmp taxonomy ITS
```

Note that the `~/conda` directory is used for the installation of all additional necessary software (`--conda-prefix` argument). This allows reusing the installed software across analyzes of different datasets.

### On a computer cluster

A complete denoising run of a dataset on a HPCC may look like this (using SLURM with [this profile](https://github.com/Snakemake-Profiles/slurm#quickstart)):

```sh
outdir=~/path/to/analysis  # must contain a config directory
conda activate snakemake
snakemake -d $outdir \
    -j10 -c20 \
    --use-conda --conda-prefix ~/conda \
    --profile slurm \
    --group-components sample=50 qc=100 \
    denoise cmp taxonomy ITS \
    --rerun-incomplete \
    --default-resources runtime=180 \
    --rerun-triggers mtime
```

This command runs a maximum of 10 simultaneous jobs (`-j`), which may run on different nodes, each job with 20 cores (`-c`). 

An important part is `--group-components sample=50 qc=100`. Let's assume that 300 samples should be analyzed. By default, the USEARCH-based pipeline will do the paired-end read merging, primer trimming and quality filtering for every of those samples separately on a single CPU core, submitting one job to the cluster for every sample. The same is true for the QC (FastQC) of the raw sequencing reads. In order to limit the number of submitted jobs, `group-components` [allows processing](https://snakemake.readthedocs.io/en/v7.19.1/executing/grouping.html#job-grouping) multiple samples together, in this case 50 of them (`sample=50`), resulting in only 6 sample processing jobs to be submitted instead of 300. Since the QC is done separately for forward and reverse reads, we group together 100 single read files (`qc=100`), which should also result in 6 QC jobs.

After pre-processing, the sample files are combined for denoising, which can only run on a single node. However, if many pipelines/pipeline variants should be evaluated, component grouping can also be used (e.g. `--group-components denoise=4`). Other pipelines (currently QIIME and Amptk) don't allow processing every sample separately, these rules therefore belong to a group called `prepare`. Other groups are `otutab` (OTU table construction for USEARCH pipelines) `taxonomy` (taxonomy assignment), `ITS` (ITSx) and `cmp` (sequence comparisons). It is even possible to [assign single rules to custom groups](https://snakemake.readthedocs.io/en/v7.19.1/executing/grouping.html#job-grouping).

Adding `--rerun-triggers mtime` at the end is currently recommended to avoid unnecessary re-running of QIIME/Amptk jobs.

## Analyzing in R

The R source file [`R/read_amplicon.R`](R/read_amplicon.R) provides code for reading all data from a results directory. See also the small [example analysis](test/R_example/example.md).


## Comparison of denoising/clustering pipelines

There is a separate bash script `scripts/compare_results.sh`, which creates an Excel file comparing the number of reads assigned to each 98% cluster by each pipeline. A separate workbook is created for each sample. The script requires VSEARCH, as well as R with the following packages: `ggplot2`, `tidyverse`, `data.table` and `openxlsx`.


## Still not finished...

A list of possible next steps includes:

- Enable single-end analyses and other platforms than Illumina
- Integrate more pipelines / clustering methods
- Integrate more taxonomy databases
- Testing deployment on different systems
- Improve configuration of job resources (memory, CPUs)
- The USEARCH pipeline may be moved into an extra repository to be used independently. This repo has a strong focus on the comparison of a variety of different pipelines as well as handling complex cases (e.g. several primer combinations).
- ...
